# Date Lifeforms Intent

### Inner-workings / Rules of the Simulation

Software lifeform simulation that uses chemestry and biology metaphors to convert raw digital data (bytes) into a simulated physical universe that obeys a set of invented-but-based-on observable chemical/physical rules. These rules cause the raw bytes (elements) to bond and form complex molecules (which require energy to bond, and release energy when broken down) and eventually self-organize into organized matter, living cells, and eventually: multi-cellular structures (think vastly simplified plants). The simulated lifeforms (both single and multi-cellular) obey the chemical rules of the simulation and grow physically within the simulation (cell wall material relates to physical size/shape form), function (if specialized/differentiated), reproduce and die according to the resources (energy, molecules) in their environment. Dying of course does not destroy the moleculat material but it is decomposed and transformed back into an elemental state just like in a real living system. There is no "central planning" or "guiding hand" in this simulation. It starts with a "big bang" which is the population of the initial bytes, and then proceeds according to the rules of the chemestry. The physical space of the simulation is 2 dimensional, and time progresses according to wall clock time. The speed of metabolic processes or other chemical processes is tied to a constant which can be adjusted. The simulated unvierse can be inspected as a data set and rendered visually as an image if required. For lifeforms, simplified DNA will be simulated as it is required for reproduction.

### A Human User's Perspective

From an outside observer's perspective, i.e. a human user who is inspecting the simulation, they might see earth at the bottom (nutrient-rich, water-rich soil) and "data plants" (stylized graphical represnetation of the macro-sized multi-cellular data life forms... imagine a 2D, low-fidelity, pixilated vines) growing towards the light at the "top" of the universe (a source of energy). In this sense, the goal of the simulation is to turn ugly data (such as a spreadsheet or a PDF) into a beuatiful, generative garden of "data plants" that grow and change and exhibit life-like qualities, but the visual representation need not be sophisticated. Properties like hard, soft, mineral, flexible, wet, etc may be inferred from the organic makeup of the underlying molecular structure that makes up the plants, creating visible changes in color or texture or organism behavior.

### A coder's perspective

Everything must be made simple, elegent and readable. Where chemestry and biology are complex, we will simplify for the convenience of modeling. The CONCEPTS of how things need to work come from real science (physics, chemestry, biology)--becuase this is software based-on biology, but it can be drastically simlified for convenience. Metablism is a concept, evolution is a concept, molecular bonds are a concept. These things can be modeled very simply and non-realistically. The code should be simple. And it should be based off primitives and rules moreso than logical routines and predefined complex classes. I would imagine for example, that the biology code would depend on the chemestry code, and so the the chemestry code could be its own module that is stand-alone and it is imported into the biology module. Objects in the simulation should not be manufactured out of thin-air. If there is not enough energy for the simulation to do anything then it should not do anything, and it is up to the developer to change the starting conditions of the simulation to allow for more energy or energy sources (as an example). Success is also incremental. Just getting the chemestry to work is a complete milestone. Getting a single cell to form and metabolize and eventually die is tremendous progress. The end-state of visualizable multi-celled plant-like organisms in a 2D garden is a far-off future state. We want to build the primitives to make taht possible some day. The integration of all these other smaller modular pieces succesfully scaled up can create that if done properly. Its too high an order of complexity to tackle right now. It should be easy to debug the simulation by observing it while its running. Probably this means there needs to be some harness to "watch" it visually even if the stuff happening is "too small to see" such as individual bytes or chemical events. I imagine that it "runs in a window" or you can attach a web browser to it and get a live debuggable simluation (similar to how video games work like Sim City).